
By Pope Gregory into this regioun,
Yeer of our Lord by computacioun
Compleet five hundryd fourty and eek nyne,
As cronyclers make mencioun,
In ther bookys fully determyne.

Thus he began by grace of Goddis hond
(Wher God list werche may be noon obstacle),
By his laboure was cristened al this lond,
Feith of our Lord wex moor cleere than spectacle.
Whan th'Oly Goost made His habitacle
In tho personys that wern in woord and deede
By Awstyn tournyd, God wrouhte a gret myracle
To make hem stable in Articles of the Creede.

But to resorte ageyn to my mateere:
With th'Oly Goost Austyn sett afire
Gan preche and teche devoutly the maneere
Of Cristes lawe abrood in every shire,
Grace of our Lord did hym so inspire
To enlwmyne al this regioun.
Of aventure his herte gan desire
To entre a village that callid was Comptoun.

The parissh preest of the same place
Aforn provided, in ful humble wyse
Besouhte hym meekly that he wolde of grace
Here his compleynt as he shal devise.
In pleyn language told hym al the guyse:
Lord of that thorpe, requeryd ofte sithes 
- He ay contrayre t'obeye to th'emprise10
Of Hooly Chirche - list not paye his tithes.

"Entretid hym lik to his estat,11
First secrely, next afforn the toun,
But al for nouht: I fond hym obstynat,
Moost indurat in his oppynyoun,
Toold hym the custom groundid on resoun -
He was bounde by lawe of oold writyng
To pay his dymes - and for rebellioun
I cursyd hym, cause of fals tithyng.

"This mateer hool ye must of riht redresse,
Requeryng you of your goodlyheede,
By youre discrecioun to do rihtwisnesse,
Peysen al the cas and prudently take heede
That Hooly Chirche have no wrong in deede;
Al thyng commytted and weyed in ballaunce, 
Ye to be juge, and lyk as ye proceede





(see note)
way of life


parts

Marvelous; (see note); (t-note)

(see note)


(see note)

the dawn; the sun god; (see note)

describe
Astronomical equator; (t-note)

(t-note)
perfect; (see note)
(t-note)

before; aware; (see note)
(see note)

Chose

spheres; (see note)

Charioteer

Before
idolators

"the sun of righteousness"; (see note)
To reveal the light of his mercy


To dispel; obstinate unbelief

(t-note)
whoever cares to take note
are remembered

at that time; pain
also
off



To speak of; (see note)
Reckoning


(see note)

calculate


wishes to work

grew; glass
home
those; were
converted
(see note)


Austin, kindled by the Holy Spirit,




By chance
(see note)


Previously appointed; (see note)
kindly
Hear; describe [it]
all the particulars
village; [although] often asked

would not


in private; in front of


[I] told
[Namely, that] he was; (see note)

excommunicated him, because


You are required; goodness

Weigh; case

[Let] all the evidence be considered
judge; determine [it]


serious and judicious; (see note)
Knew

[He] determined; guilty [as charged]
reform; amenable
justly



(t-note)

According to your deserts
bound by


be liable



wish


in rows
statement

sheaf; (see note)

less



at once
excommunicated; (see note)
Throughout his Mass; sort of person
vacate

I. e., in the presence of
delay
tomb [inside the church]
as the people looked on
rapidly; (t-note)
Waited there outside the Cemetery; (see note)
time; being said
gate



They became almost crazy with fear
with [mutual] consent
(see note)

[He] gave; (t-note)


perceptive; awareness
[He] saw by their demeanor


(see note); (t-note)
corpse; (see note)
who chose to bleed for mankind



A long time ago
(t-note)

payment of debts
Against your command; (see note)



[The power of] your command was everywhere

(see note)
led
given (imposed)
[By] which to my shame

Disgraced




lord; (see note)

[Although] many times urged by
[I] had


(see note)


(see note)
devoid of forgiveness

around [him]
[if] they would [dissolve] into water

mind
means
At; spectacle
grew disconsolate



on him (i.e., the corpse); (see note)




knowledge
If; rite [of exhumation]
unearth
(see note)
dire; bind



(see note)
clear and deliberate
Asked

Seen
(t-note)

(t-note)


[and I] made clear the peril
to repay his arrears


[He] died


With somber countenance

merciful
flexible
(see note)

may be reconciled; (see note); (t-note)

(t-note)
As an act of pure mercy

Stabbed
prosecuted
penitent
[formally] forgive [him]
(see note)


(see note)
scourge (whip)

(see note)
sinners



Granted mercy (forgiven); (see note); (t-note)


justice
Inflict; chastisement

remedy except for
absolution; transgression






(see note); (t-note)

(see note)

One; (see note)
strange


Beaten; [he] endured




(see note); (t-note)





judgment; (see note)
intercession


Because
Justice; joined; forgiveness
He (i.e., God)
Was pleased to acknowledge







(see note)


(see note); (t-note)
grave

[the] help

request
[So that] unto


allow; (t-note)
To wait

pay no heed to anything; (see note)



(see note); (t-note)
pillows
[Until the] day; (see note); (t-note)
summons [us] to appear

(see note)

to send you



(see note)




(see note)
cockle; mingled

bought (redeemed); (t-note)

died




debt; (t-note)
(t-note)
at once



(see note)
too far

Concerning; in various ways



Do what you can; narrative


	


Go To The Life of Saint Francis in the South English LegendarySAINT AUSTIN AT COMPTON: FOOTNOTES


1 Lines 5-7: Abel, whose life was sinless, began [the practice of tithing: see line 2] / Simply to give delight to God; / Having figured out the sum total of all his produce and livestock

2 Lines 14-16: Sifting through the "figures" (archetypes/typological correspondences) of all kinds of sacrificial offerings, we find that the faith of the entire church rests symbolically on the bread and wine provided by [Melchisedech's] kingly abundance

3 Lines 33-34: This was his vow, [spoken] with great humility / Just as his intent [was] humble (i.e., his humble words reflected his inner purpose), in very plain language

4 To Abraham, who with these three fruits (i.e., wine, oil, and wheat)

5 Lines 53-55: For those interested in interpretation, these three [fruits] correspond first to priest-hood and then to renowned kings

6 Lines 61-64: In short the testimony of the patriarchs and prophets promises to increase the good fortune, prosperity, and grace of all people in their livelihoods, who pay their tithes properly with cheerful heart and demeanor

7 Lines 67-70: It is guaranteed that he will never prosper, / [But shall] lack [God's] favor and fertile abundance, / Causing their bounty to diminish with each season; / Whoever will not pay his tithe to Holy Church

8 Lines 84-86: He was honored by people of high and low rank, because, although Austin avoided worldly display, divine grace had trumpeted his praise, that heavenly sound, on account of his merits

9 By the infusion of the Holy Spirit

10 He always refusing to obey the command

11 "[I] pleaded [with] him in a manner befitting his [noble] rank["]

12 And was quite appalled by the facts of the case

13 If you withhold the tenth part [of your income] from God

14 Lines 187-88: It is always by my labor, without fail, year in, year out, that the land gets planted

15 Whatever kind of boast anyone cares to utter (i.e., regardless of what anyone else says)

16 For as long as you were present at the Mass

17 As long as they looked at the corpse, they could not be comforted

18 "Yes indeed," he said, "and I sorely regret it["] 

19 To put an end to his afflictions in Purgatory

20 Lines 326-28: The last priest [of the Britons' time], resuscitated from his grave, / Absolved the other corpse with a bitterly severe whipping / In order to save his soul

21 Lines 337-38: Putting all the circumstances [of this event] in proper relation, / Weighing every aspect of this miracle [it seems to me that]

22 [As is] proven in many exempla (didactic stories) on this subject

23 With respect to the judging and sentencing of every kind of person

24 Lines 357-59: To do his utmost, with all his heart, by preaching the faith of Christ as it is grounded in the gospels

25 Supreme fullness of spiritual joy

26 Let nothing be lost, beyond what He has redeemed for us 

27 This [literary] work of mine stands ready to be corrected [by others]







SAINT AUSTIN AT COMPTON: EXPLANATORY NOTES
5-8 Abel began . . . tenthe of his substaunce. See Genesis 4:3-4. The story of Abel and Cain does not describe their offerings as tithes, but the term is common enough elsewhere in the Old Testament: e.g., Genesis 14:20 (Abraham's tithe to Melchisedech) and Numbers 18:21-29 (the people of Israel are to give their annual tithe of first-fruits to the priestly class of Levites for their sustenance and for sacrifices to God). For a vivid late medieval depiction of the Cain and Abel story as an illustration of just and unjust tithing, see the Wakefield Mactacio Abel, in The Wakefield Pageants, ed. Cawley, pp. 1-13.

9-14 Melchisedech . . . figurys out to serche. Genesis 14:1-24. See the discussion of "Tithes and Typology" in the Introduction to this chapter.

20 preceptis. A loaded technical term in this context, since there had been considerable controversy in Lydgate's time and earlier as to whether lay people's payment of personal tithes (on income derived from sources other than agricultural land and produce) to the parish clergy was mandated by God's law (sub precepto divino), or whether people were free (licet unicuique) to give the tithes to charity instead if they chose. See, e.g., the opening Latin and English documents recording the Archbishop's case against Friar William Russell of London in 1428, Chichele, Register of Henry Chichele 3.118-119 (cited above in note 30 of the Introduction).

25-26 Fro Melchisedech . . . sette of tithes a fundacioun. Lydgate, having sette . . . a fundacioun (i.e., provided one set of Biblical precedents for tithing), continues to offer further authorities in what follows. But his phrase Melchisedech doun to Abraham is problematic, since the two were contemporaries. More logical would be "Fro Abel doun to Abraham" or, better still, "Doun fro Melchisedech and Abraham," but the manuscripts concur on the awkward reading.

29-40 Whan Jacob sauh in his avisioun . . . I shal to Thee offren up the dymes. Genesis 28:10-22.

46-48 In hooly writ remembryd . . . were offryd up for tythes. E.g., Deuteronomy 14:23, 18:4; Malachias 3:10; 1 Corinthians 9:11, 13.

49-52 The Patriark of antiquyte . . . Gaff to Jacob his benediccioun. See Genesis 27, the story of Isaac, Jacob, and Esau, but there is no mention of oil, only of corn and wine. Jacob does, however, anoint his stone pillow at Bethel (Genesis 28:18). 

51 which. The relative pronoun seems redundant.

78 As he tauht, sothely so he wrouhte. Docere verbo et exemplo (teaching by saying and doing) was a commonplace of medieval hagiography and Christian ethics. Compare Matthew 5:19 and, e.g., Chaucer's Parson in The General Prologue of the Canterbury Tales: "first he wroghte, and afterward he taughte" (I[A]497). But Lydgate might also have been prompted by Bede's account, where the missionaries are said to have "in all things practised what they preached" (Bede's Ecclesiastical History, ed. Colgrave and Mynors, pp. 76-77).

83 Unkouth myracles wrouhte with hys hand. Compare the Latin Narratio (line 3): diuini uerbi semina ex more gentibus erogando (" as usual sowing the seeds of the divine word among the heathen peoples"). The well-known seed metaphor derives ultimately from the parable of the sower in Matthew 13:1-9, 18-23. Although Bede's account makes it clear that Austin and his followers were performing miracles (Bede's Ecclesiastical History, pp. 76-77, 108-09, 136-37), there is no indication that Austin himself undertook any missionary work outside of Kent, except for his ill-fated meeting with the Welsh bishops somewhere in the Midlands (pp. 135-41). Two of his colleagues, Mellitus and Paulinus, successfully established missions in, respectively, the London area and Northumbria (pp. 142-43). Later hagiographers, however, beginning with Goscelin of Canterbury in his Historia S. Augustini (end of the eleventh century), ascribe to Austin a variety of wanderings and miracles in other parts of England. The Narratio builds on this later legendary tradition, but in doing so creates a blatantly anachronistic situation: for Austin, traveling on a missionary journey, finds at Compton a fully functioning Christian community already in place, complete with a lord of the manor and a disgruntled priest. With some judiciously vague and repetitious narrative later in the poem (lines 129-44), Lydgate manages to suggest that Austin visited Compton after "By his labour was cristened al this lond" (line 131) as part of a second phase in his mission to "preche and teche devoutly the maneere / Of Cristes lawe" (lines 139-40), and to strengthen the faith of the people already converted ("By Awstyn tournyd," line 135). The Compton miracle's divine purpose was "To make hem stable in Articles of the Creede" (line 136).

85-86 grace hath his horn so blowe . . . the hevenly soun. In Middle English, "to have one's horn blown" often meant to have one's infamy proclaimed, but Lydgate is clearly using the expression positively to connote a kind of celestial trumpet fanfare bruiting Austin's fame as a holy man.

88 Cristes Apostil. None of the biblical apostles was ever credited with preaching in Britain (although the Glastonbury legend of Joseph of Arimathea was a move in that direction), but Bede and most of the English churches awarded the title "Apostle of the English" to Pope Gregory himself. At St. Augustine's, Canterbury, however, whose hagiographic traditions may be reflected here, the title was conferred on Austin. See Thacker, "Cults at Canterbury," pp. 221-46. The apostolic epithet is also used in the title of the Narratio in several of the manuscripts.

Brutis Albioun. According to an early medieval Welsh legend popularized and elaborated by Geoffrey of Monmouth in his Historia regum Britanniae or History of the Kings of Britain (c. 1136), Britain was originally called Albion, but was renamed in honor of the Trojan prince, Brutus or Britto (great-grandson of Aeneas), who was believed to have colonized the island with his followers in the aftermath of the Trojan war.

89-91 He was Aurora . . . moost glorious to devise. Phebus and the day sterre (lines 89, 91) refer to Christ as the light of the world (compare John 1:4-5) and the sun of righteousness (see below, lines 108-09). Austin is figured here as the dawn, Aurora, i.e., the herald of the sun's light. Lydgate found suggestions for these allusions, which are developed with further hybrid classical-biblical imagery in the next stanza (97-104), not in the Narratio but rather in the elaborate rhetoric of Goscelin's life of Augustine and in the liturgy for the feast of a Confessor Bishop (such as Austin himself), specifically the readings at Mass drawn from Ecclesiasticus 50, where the high priest himself is compared to the "day star," stella matutina. For more details and references see Whatley, "John Lydgate's Saint Austin," pp. 215-16.

95 Cristes lawe. Lydgate uses the phrase here and later (line 140) to refer to the gospel message, in keeping with the strongly legalistic flavor, and emphasis on due process, of his rendering of the priest's and bishop's encounters with the tithe-breaking laymen. Compare lines 158, 174, 184, and also the opening of the Middle English poem, Saint Erkenwald, lines 33-34: "Now of þis Augustynes art is Erkenwolde biscop / At loue London toun and the laghe teches."

97-104 This was doon . . . of foure gospelleeris. The ultimate source of this image of the Church as a char (line 101, "car," or "chariot") drawn by four figures representing the Evangelists is Ezechiel's first vision (Ezechiel 1:4-21). Lydgate's question, "Who drove the car?" (line 101), i.e., who preached the gospel before the charioteer (Auriga, line 104) Austin, is rhetorical, since the car and the light of the Word were in effect absent from England for 150 years, the bishops of the fugitive Britons doing nothing to convert their heathen supplanters, the English. For further details and references, see Whatley, "John Lydgate's Saint Austin," p. 215n57.

98 Of th'Oly Goost by the influence. This sort of inversion of normal word order is typical of Lydgate's aureate, Latinate style. See below, line 107, and many others.

102 nyne speerys. The nine crystalline concentric spheres that make up the so-called Ptolemaic conception of the universe widely accepted among learned Christians until the end of the Middle Ages. Here Lydgate seems to equate the combined harmonic influence or "favor" of the spheres with God's grace.

108 sol justicie. The original biblical source of this phrase, "sun of righteousness," is Malachias 4:2, shortly after one of the most important biblical passages on tithing, Malachias 3:10-12.

122 Awstyn cam first doun. Today we would envisage Austin "coming up" from Italy, northwards towards Britain, but Lydgate may be picturing the Europe of the medieval mappae mundi or world maps, in which the Mediterranean was in the middle of the map and Britain below it in the bottom left corner.

126 five hundryd fourty and eek nyne. The real date of Augustine's mission to Kent was 597, which was accurately recorded in Bede's Ecclesiastical History and the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle. The 38-year discrepancy is probably the result of scribal errors in whichever chronicle Lydgate consulted (see line 127), or possibly alludes to some obscure piece of numerological symbolism. The Narratio gives no dates, except the 150-year interval between the death of the British priest and Austin's mission.

136 Articles of the Creede. Mention of the Creed, which is recited by Catholic Christians, for example, after the reading of the Gospel at Mass, prompts Lydgate's readers to interpret the brief miracle tale that follows as an illustration of the basic truths of the Christian faith, but especially the eschatological ideas of judgment ("He shall come to judge both the quick and the dead"), mercy ("the forgiveness of sins"), and resurrection ("the resurrection of the body").

144 Comptoun. The name in the Narratio (line 2) is Cometona, from OE Cumb ("narrow valley"; compare Welsh Cym) + OE tun ("village," "town"). There is no Compton in Oxfordshire, but there are several in neighboring Warwickshire. The seventeenth-century antiquary, Sir William Dugdale, in The Antiquities of Warwickshire, 1.580- 81), identifies the story's locale as Long Compton, close to the Oxfordshire border, with its impressive thirteenth-century church on the road leading to Woodstock and Oxford. Although there are records of late medieval disputes at Long Compton between rival claimants to the tithe income, we are not aware of anything there that could have inspired the legend itself. Moreover, Long Compton is much further from Woodstock than "sex miliariis" (Narratio, line 3). Another claimant for the putative location is Combe, Oxfordshire, exactly six miles by road from Woodstock.

146 Aforn provided. Provide is used in its ecclesiastical sense, "appoint (someone) to a benefice," i.e., a stipendiary position as a priest. The phrase Aforn provided gives the impression that the priest was installed at Compton during the first phase of Austin's mission. See above, note on line 83. 

158 He was bounde by lawe of oold writyng. In the Narratio (lines 23-24) it is Austin who later on formally reminds the lay lord about the fidelium consuetudines et . . . patrum traditiones ("customs of the faithful and . . . traditions of the fathers") according to which he must excommunicate him for refusing to pay his tithes. Lydgate has transferred the invocation to the priest and altered it to refer to written law. Tithe payment was hardly a fixed element of church law during the time of Austin himself in the sixth century, but enforcement of tithe payment begins to figure in both ecclesiastical and secular laws from shortly afterwards. The system of paying tithes specifically for the upkeep of the parish church (as opposed to devoting them to poor relief or hospitals) was not formalized in England, however, until the later tenth century, when it becomes explicit in the laws of King Edgar. By 1281 (i.e., probably around the time when the Narratio was composed), the Lambeth Constitutions order parish priests to make public and formal pronouncements, four times a year, of sentences of excommunication on everyone in their parishes who, among other offenses, was in arrears with their payments of tithes.

169-76 Hooly Awstyn . . . seyde unto this knyht. In this stanza, as in the previous (lines 161-68), Lydgate amplifies the story-line to emphasize legal due process (compleynt [line 170], caas [line171], poynt coupable [line 172], lawe [line 174], riht [line 174]) and the care taken by Austin to ascertain the merits of the priest's charges. The Narratio (lines 11-12) simply tells how, after hearing the priest's complaint, Augustine ordered the knight brought before him: "Quod audiens sanctus Augustinus precepit militem accersiri ante se."

192 cheef. Other copies such as London, BL MSS Lansdowne 699 (fol. 37v) and Harley 4826 (fol. 48r) have the more usual spelling, sheeff.

198-200 Each cursyd man . . . voyde shulde his place. The sense of line 198, Each cursyd man . . . grace, is repeated, apparently just to fill out the stanza, at 199-200: every maneer wiht . . . accursyd.

206 Seyntuarye. In late ME, seyntuarye can be a synonym for "cemetary" (see MED seyntuarye 4a); our punctuation avoids the lack of grammatical sense in MacCracken's unpunctuated line by assuming that Seyntuarye is used in apposition to "chircheyeerd" (line 205), and that the adverb ther refers forward to "afore the chirche style" (line 208). In one Lydgate manuscript, London, BL MS Harley 4826, fol. 48v (examined by Robert Upchurch), a later reader added the punctuation we have chosen to adopt here. Alternatively, it is possible that, unpunctuated, the difficult phrase Seyntuarye bood may mean "submitted to the sanctuary," i.e, the corpse respected the inviolable space of the church precincts. Either way, he is clearly envisaged as standing outside the churchyard. The Narratio (line 31) also states that he left the cimiterium.

213 To hooly Austyn made relacioun. The implication is that Austin, absorbed in celebrating Mass at the altar, has not seen what has been happening, since the corpse would have left the church at the other end of the building. 

221 The crucifix ther baner was in deede. Baner is another detail Lydgate found in the full Latin Narratio (lines 35-36: precedat nos cum aqua benedicta . . . crucis dominice vexillum, "Let the standard of the Lord's cross,with holy water, precede us"), but not in Brompton (sed Crux cum aqua benedicta nos praecedat, ed. AS Maius 6.396). The image echoes Bede's description of Austin advancing with his monks to meet King Ethelbert of Kent for the first time: "But they came endowed with divine not devilish power and bearing as their standard a silver cross (crucem pro vexillo)" (Bede's Ecclesiastical History, pp. 74-75). But Austin's formula of conjuration (line 223, "In Jesu name, that lyst for man to bleede") is Lydgate's own contribution, introducing Christ's personal name and a direct reference to His physical death on the Cross. This marks a turning point, a shift from emphasis on justice and law towards themes of mercy and forgiveness.

222-24 Blissid Austyn . . . for to telle. The infinitive verb to telle (line 224) is dependent on gan compelle (line 222). Lydgate mingles indirect and direct speech in a way that modern English no longer allows. Another instance is at lines 263-66.

230 Geyn thy biddyng. See Austin's command, lines 197-200.

235 in the poorche abyde. In the Narratio (line 30), the tomb from which the cadaver rises is in ipso introitu ecclesiae ("in the very entrance of the church"). Many medieval English parish churches have a roofed porch or vestibule outside the main door leading into the nave. The excommunicated lord's meaning here presumably is that he could not even linger in this outermost part of the building, but was compelled to cross the churchyard and stand at the outermost gate or "style" (see line 208). At Long Compton, as in many other medieval parish churches, the south porch has a medieval sculpted sarcophagus built into its side wall. See the architectural plan in Salzman, ed., The Victoria History of the County of Warwick, 5.56.

244 patroun. The term here connotes the person who controls the right to dispose of the ecclesiastical benefice attached to the church.

249-50 This hundryd yeer . . . / And fifty ovir. The British lord claims to have been suffering in Purgatory for 150 years, i.e., since about the year 399 according to the mistaken dating of Austin's mission as 549 (see line 126 and the accompanying explanatory note). Lydgate transfers the 150-year figure here from Austin's later conversation with the resuscitated priest, perhaps to emphasize the extent of the excommunicate's suffering.

252-53 a dirk prisoun of desolacioun . . . / Mong firy flawmys, voyd of remissioun. The equivalent passage in the Narratio (lines 54-55) has animam ad claustra infernalia iugiter cruciandam incendiis emisi ("I sent my soul to the infernal prison house to be tortured ceaselessly in its fires"). This is another passage linking Lydgate's poem to the full version of the legend rather than to the Brompton Chronicle. But Lydgate adds the phrase voyd of remissioun ("devoid of forgiveness"), doubtless an allusion to one of the climactic phrases in the "articles" of the Creed: in remissionem peccatorum ("for the forgiveness of sins"). See above, line 136 and the accompanying explanatory note.

264 un. MS Harley 2265 and MacCracken's edition have vn. The form un for the preposition on is ith rigour mercy may accoorde. Lydgate may be alluding here to the eschatological debate and final concord of the "four daughters" of God (mercy and truth, justice and peace, based on Vulgate Psalm 84:11 and frequently reflected in other works of Middle English literature, e.g., Langland's Piers Plowman, C-Text (ed. Pearsall) Passus 20.116 ff., and The Mary Play (ed. Peter Meredith), lines 1119 ff. Lydgate elaborates on the Narratio here to emphasize the importance of mercy and forgiveness made possible through Christ's suffering and redemption. The warning against "vengeableness" (line 295) is not reflected anywhere in his source. Lydgate offers much sterner advice about rigour in his Defence of Holy Church, lines 103-05 (ed. MacCracken, Minor Poems of John Lydgate, p. 34): 

Ansee Ward, Harlots, pp. 1-25).

313 Take to mercy. Literally, "Taken to mercy," i.e., received into or embraced by God's mercy because of trcies are over all his works"), which is quoted in the Narratio (lines 82-83) by Austin himself to persuade the dead priest to have mercy on the dead knight's soul. On the Psalm verse as evidence that Lydgate, in his treatment of mercy and justice in the legend of the emperor Trajan (see next note), is alluding here to Langland's Piers Plowman, see Whatley, "John Lydgate's Saint Austin," pp. 211-14.

343-47 Trajan, the Roman emperor who reigned 98-117, was widely believed in the Middle Ages to have been rescued from damnation (as a pagan) by the prayers and merits of Pope Gregory, who was moved by stories of the emperor's justice as a ruler. In the later Middle Ages some theologians believed that in order for Gregory to "save" Trajan, he must have prayed to resuscitate him and then baptized him. The situation is analogous to that in Saint Austin at Compton, where posthumous redemption is made possible by the performance of a sacrament (penance) after the resuscitation of a corpse.

356-60 Austin is offering the priest the chance to return to the world to help him preach the gospel to the English (as in the Narratio [lines 97-99]: quatinus . . . animas diabolica fraude deceptas ewangelii uerba seminando ad suum creatorem reducas? ("Do you wish me to pray to the Lord on your behalf that you might come back to us and plant the word of the gospel in order to rescue souls that have been snared by the devil's fraud?"). But Lydgate's rendering is more than usually tortuous.

359 deveer. From AN dever (Modern French devoir). Lydgate probably stresses the first syllable here (compare endeavor). The word could mean "duty" or "utmost," "what one can." See also line 408.

369 rest in pees. Compare the well-known Christian prayer for the dead, requiescat in pace ("may he/she rest in peace"), often abbreviated to R. I. P.
